A North Carolina political operative who worked for former Republican congressional candidate Mark Harris was arrested Wednesday after he was indicted over absentee ballot irregularities in 2016 and 2018 elections, a Wake County, N.C., prosecutor said Wednesday.

Leslie McCrae Dowless Jr. was charged with three counts of obstruction of justice, two counts of conspiracy to commit obstruction of justice and two counts of possession of an absentee ballot.

Mr. Dowless was a contractor for Mr. Harris’s campaign during his run for the Charlotte-based Ninth Congressional District seat last year. Mr. Harris announced Tuesday he wouldn’t run in a redo election, less than a week after the state board of elections called for a new vote in light of evidence of ballot tampering.

The indictment states that Mr. Dowless collected and ordered people to collect absentee ballots from voters, sign them and mail them “in such a manner to conceal the fact that the voter had not personally mailed it himself.”

Mr. Dowless’s attorney didn’t respond to calls seeking comment. She said previously that her client did nothing wrong.

Four other people were charged with one count of conspiracy to obstruct justice and one count of possession of an absentee ballot. One of the four individuals also was charged with falsely signing the voter certification on an absentee ballot.

A Wake County grand jury returned the sealed indictments Tuesday and they were made public Wednesday after Mr. Dowless was arrested.

Mr. Harris had appeared to register a 905-vote victory over Democrat Dan McCready in the Nov. 6 election, but state officials didn’t certify the result, citing absentee-balloting irregularities.

Mr. Harris attended orientation for congressional newcomers in Washington, D.C., and had repeatedly said he should be certified as the winner—until last Thursday, when he called for a new election at an evidentiary hearing into election fraud.

“The indictments should serve as a stern warning to anyone trying to defraud elections in North Carolina,” Kim Strach, executive director of the state election board, said in a statement.

The state board said it would meet Monday to set dates for the new vote for the Ninth Congressional District. Mr. McCready has said he would run in the election.

Dallas Woodhouse, executive director of the North Carolina Republican Party, said Wednesday the allegations are disheartening. “We have fully supported prosecuting the offenders,” he said, adding that “if the allegations are true, the legal system should work its will.”