WASHINGTON—President Trump and his company’s chief financial officer coordinated with Michael Cohen to pay for the silence of a porn star and conceal Mr. Trump’s role in the deal, using sham invoices to cover it up, Mr. Cohen alleged in testimony to the House Oversight Committee.

As part of his testimony on Wednesday, Mr. Cohen showed lawmakers an Aug. 1, 2017, check to him signed by President Trump, and another signed by his son Donald Jr. and Allen Weisselberg, the Trump Organization’s CFO. He said they were related to the $130,000 payment he made to conceal an alleged sexual encounter between Mr. Trump and Stephanie Clifford, the porn star known as Stormy Daniels.
More on Cohen’s Testimony

    Live Coverage: Cohen Testifies
    Read Cohen's Prepared Testimony
    Cohen and Trump: Full Coverage

The checks, Mr. Cohen said, were part of monthly installments to reimburse him for paying Ms. Clifford just before the 2016 presidential election and were falsely identified as “legal expenses” to conceal the president’s involvement after The Wall Street Journal first reported the payment in January 2018.

﻿﻿Mr. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s former lawyer, also testified in detail about his discussions with Messrs. Trump and Weisselberg as they considered making the Clifford payment in October 2016.

Mr. Trump, who is in Vietnam for a summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, lashed out at Mr. Cohen on Twitter Wednesday morning. “Michael Cohen…was just disbarred by the State Supreme Court for lying & fraud. He did bad things unrelated to Trump. He is lying in order to reduce his prison time,” Mr. Trump wrote. Republicans on the committee made similar charges against Mr. Cohen, who has pleaded guilty to lying to Congress.

A lawyer for Mr. Weisselberg declined to comment. The Trump Organization didn’t respond to a request for comment.

In a remarkable 5½-hour spectacle, Mr. Cohen offered fresh allegations under oath on issues that have dominated the political, legal and media worlds. He said Mr. Trump knew ahead of time that WikiLeaks was going to dump Democratic National Committee emails damaging to his rival for the presidency, Hillary Clinton, and that Mr. Trump continued to discuss a project to build a Trump Tower in Moscow well into 2016, contradicting Mr. Cohen’s own testimony before Congress in 2017.
A check signed in August 2017 by President Trump to Michael Cohen, who said it was part of the reimbursement for his October 2016 $130,000 hush-money payment to Stephanie Clifford.
A check signed in August 2017 by President Trump to Michael Cohen, who said it was part of the reimbursement for his October 2016 $130,000 hush-money payment to Stephanie Clifford.

He also alleged that Mr. Trump frequently misrepresented his wealth to banks, insurance companies and tax authorities to his own advantage.

The hearing, peppered throughout with partisan bickering, presented the 52-year-old Mr. Cohen—who had long worked behind the scenes as Mr. Trump’s “fixer”—to much of the public for the first time. Mr. Cohen, his hands often clasped and brows furrowed, spoke slowly and steadily in a thick New York accent. As he read 20 pages of his prepared testimony, he paused for effect as he described Mr. Trump as a “racist...a con man…a cheat.” As the hearing concluded, he wiped away a tear at the mention of his daughter.

Republicans sought to portray the former Trump lawyer as a man scorned and a liar, noting that he pleaded guilty to crimes beyond the hush-money payments, including multiple-year tax fraud.

Rep. Jim Jordan (R., Ohio) suggested Mr. Cohen’s testimony was fueled by his bitterness about not getting a White House job, an assertion Mr. Cohen denied. Rep. Paul Gosar (R., Ariz.) told him: “You’re a pathological liar. You don’t know truth from falsehood.”

The Democratic chairman of the committee, Rep. Elijah Cummings of Maryland, while warning Mr. Cohen about his previous lies to Congress, accused Republicans of trying to silence Mr. Cohen. “The days of this committee protecting the president at all costs are over. They’re over,” Mr. Cummings said.

Mr. Cohen testified that he had about 100 tapes of clients other than Mr. Trump, and that Mr. Trump asked him to threaten individuals or entities “probably” 500 times over the past decade.

Mr. Cohen’s testimony offered little new specifics on allegations that Mr. Trump and his associates colluded with Russia during the presidential election. It did provide some clues into the continuing probe by the Manhattan U.S. attorney’s office into the financial dealings of the Trump Organization.

Asked whether he was aware of any additional illegal acts or wrongdoing by Mr. Trump that he hadn’t previously discussed, Mr. Cohen said he was—but that those matters were under investigation by federal prosecutors in Manhattan. He also said prosecutors had asked him not to discuss his most recent conversation with Mr. Trump and his associates, which he said was under investigation.

The day marked the most extensive account to date of Mr. Trump’s alleged involvement in a hush-money pact with a porn star, and for the first time publicly implicated one of Mr. Trump’s longest-serving aides, Mr. Weisselberg.

Mr. Cohen first publicly implicated the president in the hush-money scheme in August, when he alleged that Mr. Trump had directed him to arrange the payment. On Wednesday, he said he conferred with Mr. Trump about the payment multiple times before the then-candidate ultimately decided to pay off Ms. Clifford. Mr. Cohen said Mr. Trump told him: “It’s $130,000. It’s not a lot of money. And we should just do it. So go ahead and do it.”

Mr. Trump then directed Mr. Cohen and Mr. Weisselberg to “figure out how” to arrange the payment, Mr. Cohen said. He said Mr. Trump directed him to use his personal funds “to avoid any money being traced back to him that could negatively impact his campaign.”

Mr. Trump has denied directing his lawyer to break the law.

Mr. Cohen said he asked Mr. Weisselberg to pay Ms. Clifford, and that Mr. Weisselberg responded that he couldn’t. The two then discussed whether it would be possible to route the payment through one of Mr. Trump’s properties, Mr. Cohen said, adding that Mr. Weisselberg asked him if he knew anybody who “may have wanted to become a member of one of the golf clubs.” Mr. Cohen ultimately made the payment himself.

The Trump Organization finance chief was granted immunity in exchange for testifying before a grand jury last summer in the Manhattan U.S. attorney’s office investigation into Mr. Cohen’s business dealings. That probe has since widened to examine the Trump Organization’s business dealings, according to people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Cohen has made the same account of Mr. Weisselberg’s involvement to federal prosecutors, the Journal reported in November.

Mr. Cohen also offered new details about his efforts to hide the president’s alleged involvement in the hush-money payments last year. Mr. Cohen said he crafted, together with Mr. Trump and Mr. Weisselberg, a statement he issued in February 2018 that said he used his personal funds to pay Ms. Clifford and wasn’t reimbursed by the Trump Organization or the campaign. He said he purposely left Mr. Trump’s name out of the statement. Mr. Trump has denied the sexual encounter.

Mr. Cohen said Mr. Trump told him in a February 2018 call that he wanted Mr. Cohen to express that the president “was not knowledgeable of these reimbursements and he wasn’t knowledgeable of my actions.”

The former Trump lawyer recounted a February 2017 visit to the Oval Office in which Mr. Trump, while giving him a tour, told him, “don’t worry, Michael” and that his reimbursement checks were coming. “They were Fed-Exed from New York and it takes a while for that to get through the White House system,” Mr. Cohen described Mr. Trump as saying. 