	
Breakfast at Tiffany's (film)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Breakfast at Tiffany's
Breakfast at Tiffanys.jpg
Original theatrical release poster by Robert McGinnis
Directed by	Blake Edwards
Produced by	

    Martin Jurow
    Richard Shepherd

Screenplay by	George Axelrod
Based on	Breakfast at Tiffany's
by Truman Capote
Starring	

    Audrey Hepburn
    George Peppard
    Patricia Neal
    Buddy Ebsen
    Martin Balsam
    Mickey Rooney

Music by	Henry Mancini
Cinematography	

    Franz F. Planer
    Uncredited:
    Philip H. Lathrop

Edited by	Howard Smith
Production
company
	
Jurow-Shepherd
Distributed by	Paramount Pictures
Release date
	

    October 5, 1961

Running time
	114 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	

    English
    Portuguese

Budget	$2.5 million
Box office	$14 million

Breakfast at Tiffany's is a 1961 American romantic comedy film directed by Blake Edwards and written by George Axelrod, loosely based on Truman Capote's 1958 novella of the same name. Starring Audrey Hepburn and George Peppard, and featuring Patricia Neal, Buddy Ebsen, Martin Balsam, and Mickey Rooney, the film was initially released on October 5, 1961 by Paramount Pictures.

Hepburn's portrayal of Holly Golightly as the naïve, eccentric café society girl is generally considered to be one of the actress's most memorable and identifiable roles. Hepburn regarded it as one of her most challenging roles, since she was an introvert required to play an extrovert.[2]

Breakfast at Tiffany's was received positively at the time, and won two Academy Awards: Best Original Score and Best Original Song for "Moon River", which was also selected as the fourth most memorable song in Hollywood history by the American Film Institute in 2004. The film was also nominated for three other Academy Awards: Best Actress for Hepburn, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Art Direction.

In 2012, the film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.[3]
Contents

    1 Plot
    2 Cast
    3 Production
        3.1 Pre-production
        3.2 Principal photography
        3.3 Music
    4 Reception
        4.1 Critical response
        4.2 Influence
        4.3 Portrayal of Mr. Yunioshi and yellowface controversy
    5 Awards and honors
        5.1 Academy Awards
        5.2 Other awards
    6 Soundtrack
        6.1 List of songs
    7 Home media
    8 Stage adaptations
    9 See also
    10 References
    11 Further reading
    12 External links

Plot

Early one morning, a taxi pulls up at Tiffany & Co. on Fifth Avenue in New York City, from which elegantly dressed Holly Golightly emerges carrying a paper bag containing her breakfast. After looking into the shop's windows while eating her bun and sipping her coffee, she strolls home. Outside her apartment, she fends off Sid Arbuck, her date from the disastrous night before. Inside the apartment building, Holly can't find her keys so she buzzes her landlord, Mr. Yunioshi, who begrudgingly lets her in. Later, she is awakened by new neighbor Paul Varjak, who rings her doorbell to get into the building. The pair chat as she dresses to leave for her weekly visit to Sally Tomato, a mobster incarcerated at Sing Sing prison. Tomato's lawyer pays her $100 a week (a rent-covering annual "wage" of $43,600 today) to deliver "the weather report".
Audrey Hepburn as Holly Golightly

As she is leaving for Sing Sing, Holly is introduced to Paul's "decorator", wealthy older woman Emily Eustace Failenson, whom Paul nicknames "2E". That night, Holly goes out onto the fire escape to elude an over-eager date. She peeks into Paul's apartment and sees 2E leaving money and kissing Paul goodbye. After she leaves, Holly enters Paul's apartment and learns he is a writer who has not had anything published since a book of vignettes five years before. Holly, in turn, explains she is trying to save money to support her brother Fred. The pair fall asleep, but are awakened when Holly has a nightmare about Fred. When Paul questions her about this, Holly chides him for prying and leaves. She later buys Paul a typewriter ribbon to apologize and invites him to a lively party at her apartment. There, Paul meets her Hollywood agent, O. J. Berman, who describes Holly's transformation from country girl into Manhattan socialite. He is also introduced to José da Silva Pereira, a wealthy Brazilian politician, and Rusty Trawler, the "ninth richest man in America under 50".

In the days that follow, Paul and Holly become closer. The next day, 2E enters Paul's apartment, worried she is being followed. Paul tells her he will investigate and eventually confronts Doc Golightly, Holly's estranged husband. Doc explains Holly's real name is Lula Mae Barnes and that they were married when she was 14. He wants to take her back to rural Texas, as her brother Fred will be returning in a few months after Army service. After Paul reunites Holly and Doc, she tells Paul the marriage was annulled. At the Greyhound bus station, she tells Doc she will not return to Texas with him and Doc leaves town broken-hearted.

After drinking at a club, Paul and Holly return to her apartment, where she drunkenly tells him she plans to marry Trawler for his money. A few days later, Paul learns one of his short stories will be published. On the way to tell Holly, he sees a newspaper headline stating Trawler has married someone else. Holly and Paul agree to spend the day together, taking turns doing things each has never done before, including visiting the library, stealing from a little convenience store, and going to Tiffany's. At Tiffany's, Paul has the ring from Doc Golightly's box of Cracker Jack engraved as a present for Holly. After spending the night together, he awakens to find her gone. When 2E arrives, Paul ends their relationship. She calmly accepts, having earlier concluded he and some other woman are in love.

Holly schemes to marry José for his money, which angers Paul. After Holly receives a telegram notifying her of Fred's death, she trashes her apartment. Months later, Paul has moved out. He is invited to dinner by Holly, who is leaving the next morning for Brazil to continue her relationship with José. However, they are arrested in connection with Sally Tomato's drug ring, and Holly spends the night in jail.

The next morning, Holly is released on bail and finds Paul waiting, and they take a cab. He has her cat and a letter from José explaining he must end their relationship due to her arrest. Holly insists she will go to Brazil anyway, asks the cab to pull over, and releases the cat into the rain. Paul confronts Holly about his love and her behavior, then gets out of the cab in the pouring rain and leaves, tossing the engraved Cracker Jack ring into her lap and telling her to examine her life. She goes through a decision making moment, puts on the ring, and runs after Paul, who has gone looking for the cat. She searches the alley and finally finds the cat. Paul and Holly stand in the rain, and with the cat tucked into Holly's coat, look into each other's eyes and share a kiss.
Cast

    Audrey Hepburn as Holly Golightly - New York "City" girl - Socialite
    George Peppard as Paul Varjak (nicknamed "Fred" by Holly, for his resemblance to her brother) - Writer - New neighbor and kept man of "2E"
    Patricia Neal as Mrs. Emily Eustace "2E" Failenson - Rich decorator
    Buddy Ebsen as Doc Golightly - Holly's former husband from Texas
    Martin Balsam as O.J. Berman - Agent
    Mickey Rooney as I. Y. Yunioshi - Angry upstairs neighbor and Landlord
    Alan Reed as Sally Tomato - Mobster in Sing Sing
    José Luis de Vilallonga as José da Silva Pereira (credited as Vilallonga) - Holly's Brazilian rich mark
    Stanley Adams as Rutherford "Rusty" Trawler - Another failed husband mark
    John McGiver as Tiffany's salesman
    Dorothy Whitney as Mag Wildwood
    Claude Stroud as Sid Arbuck - First Holly suitor
    Mel Blanc as Holly's over eager date
    Orangey as Cat (trained by Frank Inn)
    Beverly Powers as the stripper (credited as Miss Beverly Hills)
    Elvia Allman as the librarian

Production
Pre-production

The Oscar-nominated screenplay was written by George Axelrod, loosely based on the novella by Truman Capote. Changes were made to fit the medium of cinema and to correspond to the filmmakers' vision. Capote, who sold the film rights of his novella to Paramount Studios, wanted Marilyn Monroe to play Holly Golightly, whom he had described perfectly in the book. Barry Paris cites Capote's own comments on the choice of actress: "Marilyn was always my first choice to play the girl, Holly Golightly." Screenwriter Axelrod was hired to "tailor the screenplay for Monroe". When Lee Strasberg advised Monroe that playing a "lady of the evening" would be bad for her image, she turned it down and performed in The Misfits instead. When Hepburn was cast instead of Monroe, Capote remarked: "Paramount double-crossed me in every way and cast Audrey".[4] Shirley MacLaine was also offered the part of Holly, but she turned it down and performed in Two Loves instead.[5]

Originally producers Martin Jurow and Richard Shepherd had picked John Frankenheimer as the director,[6] but Hepburn said: "I've never heard of him" and he was replaced on her request.
Principal photography
Hepburn in the opening scene.

Most of the exteriors were filmed in New York City, except the fire escape scenes and the alley scene at the end in the rain where Holly puts Cat out of the cab and then Paul and Holly look for Cat. All of the interiors, except for portions of the scene inside Tiffany & Company, were filmed on the Paramount Studios lot in Hollywood.[citation needed]

According to one report the film's on-location opening sequence, in which Holly gazes into a Tiffany's display window, was extremely difficult for director Blake Edwards to shoot. Although it was simple in concept, crowd control, Hepburn's dislike of pastries, and an accident that nearly resulted in the electrocution of a crew member are all said to have made capturing the scene a challenge. However, another report claims that the sequence was captured rather quickly due to the good fortune of an unexpected traffic lull.[7]
Music
It took me a long time to figure out what Holly Golightly was all about. One night after midnight I was still trying. I don't drink much, but I was sipping. And it came to me. I wrote ["Moon River"] in half an hour.

During the film, Hepburn sang the film's signature song, "Moon River" by Henry Mancini and Johnny Mercer. The song was tailored to Hepburn's limited vocal range, based on songs she had performed in 1957's Funny Face.[8] On the Anniversary Edition DVD of Breakfast at Tiffany's co-producer Richard Shepherd says in his audio commentary that after a preview in San Francisco, Martin Rankin, Paramount's head of production, wanted "Moon River" replaced with music by somebody like Gordon Jenkins (whose album Manhattan Tower had been out fairly recently): "Marty [Jurow, co-producer] and I both said 'over our dead bodies.'"[9] According to Mancini and Edwards, a studio executive hated the song and demanded it be cut from the film; Hepburn, who was present, responded to the suggestion by standing up and saying, "Over my dead body!"[10]

According to Time magazine, Mancini "sets off his melodies with a walking bass, extends them with choral and string variations, varies them with the brisk sounds of combo jazz. 'Moon River' is sobbed by a plaintive harmonica, repeated by strings, hummed and then sung by the chorus, finally resolved with the harmonica again."[11]
Reception
Critical response

Time magazine noted "for the first half hour or so, Hollywood's Holly (Audrey Hepburn) is not much different from Capote's. She has kicked the weed and lost the illegitimate child she was having, but she is still jolly Holly, the child bride from Tulip, Texas, who at 15 runs away to Hollywood to find some of the finer things of life—like shoes." It pointed out that "after that out-of-Capote beginning, Director Blake Edwards (High Time) goes on to an out-of-character end."[12] Almost a half century later, Time commented on the pivotal impact of Hepburn's portrayal of Golightly:[13]

    Breakfast at Tiffany's set Hepburn on her [19]60s Hollywood course. Holly Golightly, small-town Southern girl turned Manhattan trickster, was the naughty American cousin of Eliza Doolittle, Cockney flower girl turned My Fair Lady. Holly was also the prototype for the Hepburn women in Charade, Paris When It Sizzles, and How to Steal a Million: kooks in capers. And she prepared audiences for the ground-level anxieties that Hepburn characters endured in The Children's Hour, Two for the Road and Wait Until Dark.

The New York Times called the film a "completely unbelievable but wholly captivating flight into fancy composed of unequal dollops of comedy, romance, poignancy, funny colloquialisms and Manhattan's swankiest East Side areas captured in the loveliest of colors". In reviewing the performances, the newspaper said Holly Golightly is

    as implausible as ever. But in the person of Miss Hepburn, she is a genuinely charming, elfin waif who will be believed and adored when seen. George Peppard is casual and, for the most part, a subdued citizen who seems to like observing better than participating in the proceedings. Martin Balsam makes a properly brash, snappy Hollywood agent. Mickey Rooney's bucktoothed, myopic Japanese is broadly exotic. Patricia Neal is simply cool and brisk in her few appearances as Mr. Peppard's sponsor and Vilallonga, is properly suave and Continental as Miss Hepburn's Brazilian, while Buddy Ebsen has a brief poignant moment as Miss Hepburn's husband.[14]

Truman Capote hated Hepburn in the lead part. Capote biographer Gerald Clarke deemed the film a "valentine" to free-spirited women rather than a cautionary tale about a little girl lost in the big city. "The movie is a confection — a sugar and spice confection."[15]

Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes retrospectively collected reviews from 50 critics and gives the film a rating of 88%, with an average rating of 7.4/10. The site's consensus states: "It contains some ugly anachronisms, but Blake Edwards is at his funniest in this iconic classic, and Audrey Hepburn absolutely lights up the screen."[16]
Influence
Audrey Hepburn as Holly Golightly in the film's trailer

Hepburn as Holly, with her hair in a high chignon and carrying an oversized cigarette holder, is considered one of the most iconic images of 20th century American cinema.[17] Another iconic item throughout the movie is Holly's sunglasses. Often misidentified as Ray-Ban, they are Manhattan sunglasses designed and manufactured in London by Oliver Goldsmith. In 2011 the model was re-released to mark the 50th anniversary of Breakfast at Tiffany's.[18] One of three dresses designed by Givenchy for Hepburn for possible use in the film sold at auction by Christie's[19] on December 5, 2006 for £467,200 (~US$947,000), about seven times the reserve price.[20] The "Little Black Dress" by Givenchy, worn by Hepburn in the beginning of the film, is cited as one of the most iconic items of clothing in the history of the twentieth century and is, perhaps, the most famous little black dress of all time.[21][22][23][24] A second "little black dress" in Breakfast at Tiffany's, along with its wide-brimmed hat, was worn by Hepburn as Holly when she goes to visit mobster Sally Tomato at Sing Sing Prison. This dress was paid homage as one of the dresses worn by Anne Hathaway's character Selina Kyle, Catwoman's alter ego, in Christopher Nolan's The Dark Knight Rises; the comic book Catwoman character was originally drawn based on Hepburn, according to Catwoman comic cover artist Adam Hughes, creating a double homage to Hepburn's Holly Golightly in Hathaway's Catwoman.[25]

The film rejuvenated the career of 1930s movie song-and-dance man and Disney Davy Crockett sidekick Buddy Ebsen, who had a small but effective role in this film as Doc Golightly, Holly's ex-husband. His success here led directly to his best-known role as Jed Clampett on The Beverly Hillbillies.[26]

A diamond necklace at Tiffany's that Hepburn scorned as too flashy, was the Tiffany Yellow Diamond, which she wore in publicity photos for the film. Tiffany's profile, while already established as a pre-eminent luxury retailer, was further boosted by the film.[27]
Portrayal of Mr. Yunioshi and yellowface controversy
I. Y. Yuniyoshi naked in bath
Main article: I. Y. Yunioshi

For his portrayal of I. Y. Yunioshi, Mickey Rooney wore makeup and a prosthetic mouthpiece to change his features to a caricatured approximation of a Japanese person. Since the 1990s, this portrayal has been subject to increasing protest by Asian Americans, among others. For instance, in the film Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story (1993), Breakfast at Tiffany's is used as an illustration of Hollywood's racist depiction of Asian people when Bruce Lee and his future wife, Linda, see the film and Linda suggests they leave when she notices that Bruce is upset at Rooney's caricatured performance.

In his audio commentary for the DVD release, producer Richard Shepherd said that at the time of production as well as in retrospect, he wanted to recast the role "not because he [Rooney] didn't play the part well" but because Shepherd thought the part of Mr. Yunioshi should be performed by an actor of Japanese ethnicity; it was director Blake Edwards' decision to keep Rooney.[28] In a "making-of" for the 45th anniversary edition DVD release, Shepherd repeatedly apologizes, saying, "If we could just change Mickey Rooney, I'd be thrilled with the movie."[29] Director Blake Edwards stated, "Looking back, I wish I had never done it ... and I would give anything to be able to recast it, but it's there, and onward and upward."[29]

In a 2008 interview about the film, 87-year-old Rooney said he was heartbroken about the criticism:

    Blake Edwards ... wanted me to do it because he was a comedy director. They hired me to do this overboard, and we had fun doing it ... Never in all the more than 40 years after we made it – not one complaint. Every place I've gone in the world people say, "God, you were so funny." Asians and Chinese come up to me and say, "Mickey you were out of this world."[30]

Rooney also said that if he had known the portrayal would be offensive, "I wouldn't have done it. Those that didn't like it, I forgive them and God bless America, God bless the universe, God bless Japanese, Chinese, Indians, all of them and let's have peace."[30]

The film continues to draw criticism for this character, now widely considered to be a racist caricature, particularly when the movie is selected as a "classic" screened in public spaces, supported by tax dollars. In 2011, a SyFy and Brooklyn Bridge Park Corporation screening inspired petitions.[31]
Awards and honors

Academy Awards
Award[32] 	Person
Best Score of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture 	Henry Mancini
Best Original Song: "Moon River" 	Henry Mancini
Johnny Mercer
Nominated:
Best Actress in a Leading Role 	Audrey Hepburn
Best Art Direction 	Hal Pereira
Roland Anderson
Sam Comer
Ray Moyer
Best Adapted Screenplay 	George Axelrod
Other awards

    Golden Globe Awards, 1961: Best picture (musical or comedy)
    Golden Globe Awards, 1961: Best actress (musical or comedy) – Audrey Hepburn
    Henry Mancini won the Grammy Award for Best Soundtrack Album or Recording or Score.
    George Axelrod won the Writers Guild of America, East for Best Written American Drama.
    Blake Edwards was nominated for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures.
    Orangey the cat won the 1962 PATSY Award of the American Humane Association for his portrayal of "the poor slob without a name".[citation needed]
    The film was ranked #486 on Empire's The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time list for 2008.[33]
    National Film Registry, 2012
    American Film Institute ranked the film #61 in 100 Years ... 100 Passions and "Moon River" as #4 in 100 Years ... 100 Songs.

Soundtrack
Main article: Breakfast at Tiffany's: Music from the Motion Picture

The soundtrack featured a score composed and conducted by Henry Mancini, with songs by Mancini and lyricist Johnny Mercer. Mancini and Mercer won the 1961 Oscar for Best Original Song for "Moon River". Mancini won for Best Original Score. There are also unreleased score pieces from Breakfast at Tiffany's in existence; "Carousel Cue" is from an unsurfaced scene, while "Outtake 1" is from a deleted scene in which Holly and Fred visit Tiffany's and is a variation of the main theme.
List of songs

    "Moon River"
    "Something for Cat"
    "Sally's Tomato"
    "Mr. Yunioshi"
    "The Big Blow Out"
    "Hub Caps and Tail Lights"
    "Breakfast at Tiffany's"
    "Latin Golightly"
    "Holly"
    "Loose Caboose"
    "The Big Heist"
    "Moon River [Cha Cha]"

In 2013 Intrada released the complete score in its original film performance (as with many soundtrack albums by Mancini and others at the time, the album released alongside the film was a re-recording).

    Main Title (Moon River) (3:07)
    Paul Meets Cat (1:24)
    Sally's Tomato (4:57)
    The Big Blowout (1:05)
    Poor Fred (3:22)
    Moon River (Cha Cha) (2:32)
    Latin Golightly (3:05)
    Something For Cat (4:48)
    Loose Caboose – Part 1 (À La Cha Cha) (3:22)
    Loose Caboose – Part 2 (2:11)
    Moon River (Vocal By Audrey Hepburn) (2:03)
    Meet The Doc (With Organ Grinder) (1:37)
    An Exceptional Person (2:57)
    You're So Skinny (0:57)
    Turkey Eggs (2:43)
    Hub Caps And Tail Lights (2:19)
    Rats And Super Rats (2:27)
    The Hard Way (0:55)
    Rusty Trawler (0:26)
    Holly (1:56)
    A Lovely Place (1:33)
    Bermuda Nights (0:22)
    The Big Heist (4:02)
    After The Ball (1:14)
    Just Like Holly (1:41)
    Wait A Minute (0:44)
    Feathers (1:14)
    Let's Eat (1:39)
    Where's The Cat? And End Title (Moon River) (3:50)
    Moon River (Audrey Hepburn & Guitar) (1:38)
    Moon River (Piano And Guitar) (1:38)
    Moon River (Harmonica And Guitar) (1:36)
    Meet The Doc (Without Organ Grinder) (1:37)
    Piano Practice No. 1 (1:38)
    Piano Practice No. 2 (1:48)
    Piano Practice No. 3 (0:54)
    Moon River (New York Version) (2:01)
    Moon River (Whistling) (0:10)

Home media
	
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Breakfast at Tiffany's was one of the first Hepburn films to be released to the home video market in the early 1980s,[citation needed] and is also widely available on DVD. On February 7, 2006, Paramount released a 45th anniversary special edition DVD set in North America with featurettes not included on the prior DVD release:

    Audio Commentary – with producer Richard Shepherd
    Breakfast at Tiffany's: The Making of a Classic – a making-of featurette with interviews by Edwards, Neal, the "laughing/crying" woman from the party, and Sean Ferrer, Hepburn's son.
    It's So Audrey! A Style Icon – a short tribute to Hepburn.
    Brilliance in a Blue Box – a brief history of Tiffany & Co.
    Audrey's Letter to Tiffany – an accounting of Hepburn's letter to Tiffany & Co. on the occasion of the company's 150th anniversary in 1987.
    Original Theatrical Trailer
    Photo Gallery

On January 13, 2009, a remastered Centennial Collection version of the film was released. In addition to the special features on the 45th anniversary edition, this version includes:

    A Golightly Gathering – Reuniting some of the past cast members from the party with interviews on their experiences filming that segment.
    Henry Mancini: More Than Music – A featurette about Henry Mancini, "Moon River" and interviews with Mancini's wife and children.
    Mr. Yunioshi: An Asian Perspective – Documentary discussing the reaction and Asian perspective of the character of Mr. Yunioshi, one of the most controversial characters in film.
    Behind the Gates – A tour through Paramount Studios

In 2011 a newly remastered HD version of the film was released on Blu-ray with many of the features from the aforementioned DVDs. The digital restoration of the film was done by Paramount Pictures. The digital pictures were frame by frame digitally restored at Prasad Corporation to remove dirt, tears, scratches and other artifacts. The film was restored to its original look for its 50th Anniversary.[34][35]
Stage adaptations

In 1966, David Merrick produced a Broadway musical of the same name starring Mary Tyler Moore as Holly Golightly and Richard Chamberlain as Paul. The troubled production closed after four previews.

In 2004, a new musical adaptation of the film made its world debut at The Muny in St. Louis.[36]

In May 2009, actress Anna Friel confirmed that she would star in a West End adaptation of the film. The show opened in September 2009 at the Haymarket Theatre.[37]

A new stage adaption made its debut in March 2013 at the Cort Theater in New York City. The role of Holly Golightly was played by Emilia Clarke.[38]
See also

    Male prostitution in the arts
    Portrayal of East Asians in Hollywood
    Whitewashing in film
    List of Academy Award-winning films
    List of American films of 1961
    List of Audrey Hepburn credits
    List of comedy films of the 1960s
    List of films set in New York City
    List of Paramount Pictures films
    List of short fiction made into feature films
    List of fictional books from non-print media

    Video-x-generic.svgAcademy Award portalSMirC-laugh.svgComedy portalUnited States film clapperboard.svgFilm in the United States portalFlowerpowerportfolio.jpg1960s portal

References

Notes

"Breakfast at Tiffany's (PG)". British Board of Film Classification. January 8, 2001. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
Spoto, Donald (2006). Enchantment: The Life of Audrey Hepburn. New York: Harmony Books. p. 204. ISBN 0-307-23758-3.
King, Susan. "National Film Registry selects 25 films for preservation " Los Angeles Times (December 19, 2012)
Barry Paris (1996). Audrey Hepburn. Berkley Books.
Foerster, Jonathan (9 February 2011). "Shirley MacLaine isn't getting old, she's just advanced". Naples Daily News. Retrieved 27 June 2017.
Honan, Corinna (November 4, 2010). "Tantrums at Tiffany's: How a viper's nest of clashing egos nearly killed off one of the best-loved films ever made". Daily Mail. Retrieved March 12, 2018.
25 Things You May Not Know About 'Breakfast at Tiffany's' Archived June 28, 2016, at the Wayback Machine at moviefone.com, 5 Oct 2011
Spoto, Donald. Enchantment: The Life of Audrey Hepburn. New York: Harmony Books, 2006. Page 204 – 205. ISBN 0-307-23758-3
Shepherd, Richard. Breakfast at Tiffany's – Anniversary Edition/Centennial Edition audio commentary (DVD). Paramount. Event occurs at 25:20.
Erwin, Ellen; Diamond, Jessica Z. (October 2006). The Audrey Hepburn Treasures. New York: Atria Books. p. 107. ISBN 978-0-7432-8986-3.
"Movies: Never Too Much Music". Time. May 25, 1962. Retrieved 2010-10-03.
"Cinema: Once Over Golightly". Time. October 20, 1961. Retrieved 2010-10-03.
Corliss, Richard (January 20, 2007). "Audrey Hepburn: Still the Fairest Lady". Time. Retrieved 2010-10-03.
Weiler, A.H. (October 6, 1961). "The Screen: Breakfast at Tiffany's: Audrey Hepburn Stars in Music Hall Comedy". The New York Times. Retrieved 2010-10-03.
"Capote never liked Hepburn in iconic role". Today.com. Associated Press. Retrieved 10 November 2014.
Breakfast at Tiffany's at Rotten Tomatoes
Spoto, Donald. Enchantment: The Life of Audrey Hepburn. New York: Harmony Books, 2006. Page 203. ISBN 0-307-23758-3
Moss, Rob (28 July 2011). "Re-released Manhattan sunglasses mark 50th anniversary of Breakfast at Tiffany's". Eye Wear Glasses. Retrieved 19 April 2016.
"Audrey Hepburn Breakfast At Tiffany's, 1961". Christie's. 5 December 2006. Retrieved 19 April 2016.
"Auction frenzy over Hepburn dress". BBC NEWS. 2006-12-05.
"The Most Famous Dresses Ever". Glamour.com. April 2007. Retrieved 16 May 2011.
"Audrey Hepburn dress". Hello Magazine. 6 December 2006.
"Audrey Hepburn's little black dress tops fashion list". The Independent. 17 May 2010. Retrieved 16 May 2011.
Steele, Valerie (9 November 2010). The Berg Companion to Fashion. Berg Publishers. p. 483. ISBN 978-1-84788-592-0. Retrieved 16 May 2011.
Miller, Jacqui. Fan Phenomena: Audrey Hepburn. Ed. Jacqui Miller. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014. p. 26-27. ISBN 978-1-78320-206-5.
Biography for Buddy Ebsen on IMDb
"#204: Tiffany & Co. and its priceless Yellow Diamond - 1000 Things to do New York". October 1, 2014.
Shepherd, Richard. Breakfast at Tiffany's – Anniversary Edition/Centennial Edition audio commentary (DVD). Paramount. Event occurs at 3:43.
Breakfast at Tiffany's: The Making of a Classic
Magagnini, Stephen (September 28, 2008). "Mickey Rooney upset about claims his 'Tiffany's' role is racist". Sacramento Bee. Scripps Howard News Service. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008. Retrieved 2010-10-03.
"'Breakfast At Tiffany's' Brooklyn Screening Sparks Protests From Asian-American Group". July 13, 2011 – via Huff Post.
"NY Times: Breakfast at Tiffany's". NY Times. Retrieved 2008-12-24.
"Empire: Features". Empireonline.com. Retrieved 2009-05-16.
"Breakfast at Tiffany's Blu-ray".
"Latest Academy News". September 10, 2014.
"Show Archives". The Muny. Archived from the original on May 28, 2008. Retrieved May 16, 2009.
"Entertainment | West End Breakfast for Anna Friel". BBC News. 2009-05-15. Retrieved 2009-05-16.

    "Breakfast At Tiffany's—The Official Broadway Site". Retrieved 12 April 2013.

Further reading

    Breakfast at Tiffany's, by George Axelrod. Published by Paramount Home Entertainment (UK), 1960. (film script)
    Breakfast at Tiffany's: A Short Novel and Three Stories, by Truman Capote. Published by Random House, 1958.
    Wasson, Sam. Fifth Avenue, 5 A.M.: Audrey Hepburn, Breakfast at Tiffany's, and the Dawn of the Modern Woman. ISBN 978-0061774164.

External links
Breakfast at Tiffany's (film)
at Wikipedia's sister projects

    Media from Wikimedia Commons
    Quotations from Wikiquote

    Breakfast at Tiffany's on IMDb
    Breakfast at Tiffany's at the TCM Movie Database
    Breakfast at Tiffany's at AllMovie
    Breakfast at Tiffany's at the American Film Institute Catalog
    Breakfast at Tiffany's at Rotten Tomatoes

    vte

Films directed by Blake Edwards

    vte

Works by Truman Capote

    vte

Truman Capote's Breakfast at Tiffany's
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	

    GND: 4548722-4 LCCN: no98044606 VIAF: 316751710 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 316751710

Categories:

    1961 films1960s comedy-drama films1960s romantic comedy filmsAmerican comedy-drama filmsAmerican filmsAmerican romantic comedy filmsEnglish-language filmsFilms about social classFilms about writersFilms based on short fictionFilms based on works by Truman CapoteFilms directed by Blake EdwardsFilms scored by Henry ManciniFilms set in New York CityFilms shot in New York CityFilms that won the Best Original Score Academy AwardFilms that won the Best Original Song Academy AwardParamount Pictures filmsUnited States National Film Registry films

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikiquote

Languages

    Deutsch
    Español
    Français
    한국어
    Italiano
    Русский
    Tagalog
    Tiếng Việt
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 18 February 2019, at 13:44 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation	
    Powered by MediaWiki	

